URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Main_Page

Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Main Page Main Page Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikimedia Foundation MediaWiki Meta-Wiki Wikimedia Outreach Multilingual Wikisource Wikispecies Wikibooks Wikidata Wikifunctions Wikimania Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Wikiversity Wikivoyage Wiktionary Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Welcome to Wikipedia , the free encyclopedia that anyone can edit. 119,225 active editors 6,984,555 articles in English From today's featured article Richard Mansfield as Jekyll and Hyde Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde is a play written by Thomas Russell Sullivan in collaboration with the actor Richard Mansfield (pictured). It is an adaptation of Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde, an 1886 novella by Robert Louis Stevenson. The story focuses on the respected London doctor Henry Jekyll, who uses a potion to transform into Edward Hyde, a loathsome criminal. Intrigued by the opportunity to play a dual role, Mansfield secured the stage rights and asked Sullivan to write the adaptation. The play debuted in Boston on May 9, 1887, and opened on Broadway that September. Mansfield's performance was acclaimed by critics. The play opened in London in August 1888, just before the first Jack the Ripper murders. The press compared the murderer to the Jekyll character, and Mansfield was suggested as a suspect. Mansfield performed the play until shortly before his death in 1907. Sullivan made changes from Stevenson's story that have been adopted by subsequent adaptations, including film versions. (Full article...) Recently featured: Fantastic Novels Edgar Towner Battle of Poison Spring Archive By email More featured articles About Did you know ... Gilbert LaBine with uranium ore for the Manhattan Project ... that the Manhattan Project feed materials program used uranium ore (pictured) from a mine in Canada near the Arctic Circle? ... that Godfrey Hattenbach is said to be the father of Sioux City's Jewish community? ... that the Church of Grace became the Church of Saint John of Kronstadt after it was sold for one euro to a Russian Orthodox congregation to maintain its status as a church? ... that American playwright Walter "Long Run" Hackett earned that nickname for his many long-running plays staged in London's West End? ... that the Magic: The Gathering YouTube channel Tolarian Community College has raised more than US$1.5 million for the suicide-prevention hotline Trans Lifeline? ... that John J. Beckley, the first librarian of Congress, came to America as an indentured child servant? ... that in the 2024 tournament, India became the first team to win the T20 World Cup without losing a game? ... that before the Richmond Tunnel was completed, Staten Island residents had to use water from siphons? ... that "Eaea" is "aggressively Spanish"? Archive Start a new article Nominate an article In the news Pope Francis Pope Francis (pictured) dies at the age of 88. Daniel Noboa is re-elected president of Ecuador. Peruvian writer and Nobel Prize in Literature laureate Mario Vargas Llosa dies at the age of 89. A nightclub roof collapse in Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic, kills 231 people. In basketball, the UConn Huskies win the NCAA Division I women's championship and the Florida Gators win the men's championship Ongoing: Gaza war M23 campaign Russian invasion of Ukraine timeline Sudanese civil war timeline Recent deaths: Joe Thompson Kyren Lacy Aliza Magen-Halevi Tommy Helms Peter Seiffert Abel Rodríguez Nominate an article On this day April 21: Natale di Roma in Italy (AD 47); Patriots' Day in some parts of the United States (2025) Wignacourt Aqueduct 900 – A debt was pardoned by the chief of Tondo on the island of Luzon and recorded on the Laguna Copperplate Inscription, the earliest known calendar-dated document found in the Philippines. 1615 – The Wignacourt Aqueduct (pictured) in Malta was inaugurated, and was used to carry water to Valletta for about 300 years. 1725 – J. S. Bach's cantata Bleib bei uns, denn es will Abend werden, was first performed on Easter Monday. 1925 or 1926 – Al-Baqi Cemetery in Medina, the site of the mausoleum of four of the Twelve Imams of Shia Islam, was demolished by Wahhabis. 1975 – South Vietnamese president Nguyễn Văn Thiệu resigned on hearing of the fall of Xuân Lộc, the last battle of the Vietnam War. Pope Alexander II (d. 1073) Antonín Kammel (b. 1730) Cheryl Gillan (b. 1952) Vivian Maier (d. 2009) More anniversaries: April 20 April 21 April 22 Archive By email List of days of the year About From today's featured list Pel's pouched bat There are 54 extant emballonurid species, which are members of Emballonuridae, one of the twenty families of bats in the mammalian order Chiroptera and part of the suborder of microbats. Members include sheath-tailed bats, sac-winged bats, and tomb bats. They are found in all continents besides Europe and Antarctica, primarily in forests and caves, though some species can also be found in shrublands, savannas, rocky areas, or deserts. They range in size from the Amazonian sac-winged bat, at 3 cm (1 in) plus a 1 cm (0.4 in) tail, to Pel's pouched bat (pictured), at 14 cm (6 in) plus a 4 cm (2 in) tail. The 54 extant species in Emballonuridae are divided into two subfamilies: Emballonurinae contains 36 species in 12 genera, and Taphozoinae contains 18 species in 2 genera. (Full list...) Recently featured: 30th Annual South African Music Awards Sakurai Prize Accolades received by The Last of Us (TV series) Archive More featured lists Today's featured picture Sherlock Jr. is a 1924 American silent comedy film starring and directed by Buster Keaton and written by Clyde Bruckman, Jean Havez, and Joseph A. Mitchell. It features Kathryn McGuire, Joe Keaton, and Ward Crane. Production began in January 1924, and the film was released on April 21, 1924. It was selected in 1991 for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant". In 2000, the American Film Institute, as part of its series AFI 100 Years..., ranked the film at number 62 in AFI's 100 Years...100 Laughs. Film credit: Buster Keaton Recently featured: Trou au Natron African hawk-eagle Christ Crowned with Thorns Archive More featured pictures Other areas of Wikipedia Community portal – The central hub for editors, with resources, links, tasks, and announcements. Village pump – Forum for discussions about Wikipedia itself, including policies and technical issues. Site news – Sources of news about Wikipedia and the broader Wikimedia movement. Teahouse – Ask basic questions about using or editing Wikipedia. Help desk – Ask questions about using or editing Wikipedia. Reference desk – Ask research questions about encyclopedic topics. Content portals – A unique way to navigate the encyclopedia. Wikipedia's sister projects Wikipedia is written by volunteer editors and hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation, a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other volunteer projects: Commons Free media repository MediaWiki Wiki software development Meta-Wiki Wikimedia project coordination Wikibooks Free textbooks and manuals Wikidata Free knowledge base Wikinews Free-content news Wikiquote Collection of quotations Wikisource Free-content library Wikispecies Directory of species Wikiversity Free learning tools Wikivoyage Free travel guide Wiktionary Dictionary and thesaurus Wikipedia languages This Wikipedia is written in English. Many other Wikipedias are available; some of the largest are listed below. 1,000,000+ articles العربية Deutsch Español فارسی‎ Français Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 250,000+ articles Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu Bân-lâm-gú Български Català Čeština Dansk Eesti Esperanto Euskara עברית Հայերեն 한국어 Magyar Norsk bokmål Română Simple English Slovenčina Srpski Srpskohrvatski Suomi Türkçe Oʻzbekcha 50,000+ articles Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Bosanski کوردی Ελληνικά Frysk Gaeilge Galego Hrvatski ქართული Kurdî Latviešu Lietuvių മലയാളം Македонски မြန်မာဘာသာ Norsk nynorsk ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Shqip Slovenščina ไทย తెలుగు اردو Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Main_Page&oldid=1276485694" 49 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Български Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 This page was last edited on 19 February 2025, at 03:32 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Main Page 49 languages Add topic