URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Current_events

Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Portal:Current events 118 languages Ænglisc العربية অসমীয়া अवधी Авар تۆرکجه Banjar 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gú Башҡортса Беларуская भोजपुरी Bikol Central Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština ChiTumbuka Dagbanli Dansk Deutsch ދިވެހިބަސް डोटेली Ελληνικά Эрзянь Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara Eʋegbe فارسی Føroyskt Français Gaeilge Gaelg 贛語 گیلکی ગુજરાતી 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Ирон IsiZulu Íslenska ಕನ್ನಡ Kapampangan ქართული Қазақша Kurdî Ladino Latina Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Li Niha Limburgs Magyar मैथिली മലയാളം मराठी مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nāhuatl Nederlands नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Napulitano Нохчийн Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Piemontèis Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Română Русиньскый Русский Scots Sicilianu සිංහල سنڌي Slovenščina Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Тоҷикӣ ᏣᎳᎩ Tyap Українська اردو Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Volapük Walon 文言 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zeêuws 中文 Edit links Portal Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Edit instructions From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Portal maintenance status: (October 2020) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Wikipedia portal for content related to Current events Wikimedia portal Worldwide current events Sports events Recent deaths Entry views by week list Wikimedia portal Topics in the news Pope Francis Pope Francis (pictured) dies at the age of 88. Daniel Noboa is re-elected president of Ecuador. Peruvian writer and Nobel Prize in Literature laureate Mario Vargas Llosa dies at the age of 89. A nightclub roof collapse in Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic, kills 231 people. In basketball, the UConn Huskies win the NCAA Division I women's championship and the Florida Gators win the men's championship Ongoing: Gaza war M23 campaign Russian invasion of Ukraine timeline Sudanese civil war timeline Recent deaths: Joe Thompson Kyren Lacy Aliza Magen-Halevi Tommy Helms Peter Seiffert Abel Rodríguez Nominate an article April 21, 2025 (2025-04-21) (Monday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks Spillover of the Sudanese civil war 2025 Nasir clashes The South Sudan People's Defence Forces capture the town of Nasir in Upper Nile State from the Nuer White Army. (Reuters) Disasters and accidents 282 passengers are evacuated from a Delta Airlines Airbus A330 in Orlando International Airport, Florida, after the plane's right engine catches fire. No injuries are reported. (CNN) International relations Death and funeral of Pope Francis The Camerlengo announces that Pope Francis, the head of the Catholic Church, has died at the age of 88 years old early on Easter Monday. (Euronews) (AP) Following Pope Francis's death, cardinal Kevin Farrell, the Camerlengo, becomes the acting head of Vatican City until the next papal conclave in May. (NPR) Law and crime 2019 El Paso Walmart shooting The perpetrator of the racially motivated shooting that killed 23 people and injured 22 others at a Walmart building in El Paso, Texas, United States, in 2019, 26-year-old Patrick Wood Crusius, pleads guilty to state charges and is sentenced to life imprisonment without the possibility of parole to avoid the death penalty. (USA Today) April 20, 2025 (2025-04-20) (Sunday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks Red Sea crisis US–UK airstrikes on Yemen March–April 2025 United States attacks in Yemen The Houthis report that twelve people are killed and thirty others are injured in airstrikes on a market and a residential zone in Farwa District, Sanaa, Yemen. (Le Monde) Disasters and accidents The death toll from drownings during the week across Australia increases to seven after a fisherman was killed after being swept off rocks near Sydney. Three people remain missing and one other was injured. (Philippine Daily Inquirer) The death toll of the capsized Hong Hai 16 off Occidental Mindoro, Philippines, rises to nine. Two others are still missing. (Manila Bulletin) Three people are killed and ten others are injured, including one critically and four firefighters, in a large house fire in Jamaica Estates, Queens, New York, United States. (WABC-TV) (WCBS-TV) Law and crime At least one person, the perpetrator, is killed and six others are injured, in an arson attack when a man sets fire to an apartment building with a flamethrower in Bongcheon-dong, Seoul, South Korea. (Yonhap) Sports 2025 ITTF Table Tennis World Cup In table tennis, Hugo Calderano of Brazil defeats Lin Shidong of China 4–1 sets, winning the World Cup and becoming the first athlete from the Americas to win the competition. (CNN Brasil) April 19, 2025 (2025-04-19) (Saturday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks Herder–farmer conflicts in Nigeria The death toll from clashes between cattle herders and farmers earlier this week in Benue State, central Nigeria, rises to 56. (Barron's) At least 178 people are arrested in Pakistan after over 10 group attacks on KFC restaurants occur during protests against United States support for Israel in the Gaza war, with one employee shot dead. (Al Jazeera) (Al Arabiya) Disasters and accidents Four people are killed when a Cessna 180 Skywagon aircraft clips powerlines and crashes into a field southwest of Coles County Memorial Airport in Trilla, Illinois, United States. (WCIA) Seven people are killed when a passenger jeepney on a family tour crashes into a roadside canal in Boac, Marinduque, Philippines. (Xinhua) (Radyo Pilipinas) The death toll of the capsized Hong Hai 16 sand barge four days ago off Occidental Mindoro, Philippines, rises to seven. Four others are still missing. (Philippine Daily Inquirer) Two people are killed and three others are rescued after two vehicles are swept off a road during flooding in southeast Moore, Oklahoma, United States. (KWTV-DT) Law and crime U.S. federal authorities charge a student at Boston's University of Massachusetts with unlawful possession of a destructive device and malicious damage by fire after the student is arrested for setting fire to two Tesla Cybertrucks and damaging charging stations in Kansas City. (The Independent) U.S. authorities arrest a man in Colorado Springs for his "Declaration of War" threatening Elon Musk, Tesla owners, and members of Donald Trump's cabinet. The declaration, sent to various media outlets, detailed specific attack methods and aimed at Musk's elimination. (CBS News) Four executives at a company building the State Audit Office skyscraper in Bangkok, Thailand, are arrested on suspicion of breaching the Foreign Business Act. (CTV News) A tavern owner is killed and four others are injured in a mass shooting during a live music performance at a tavern in Marble Hall, Limpopo, South Africa. No arrests were made. (SABC) April 18, 2025 (2025-04-18) (Friday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks Red Sea crisis US–UK airstrikes on Yemen March–April 2025 United States attacks in Yemen The Houthis say that American airstrikes targeted the Ras Isa port in Yemen, killing 74 people and wounding 171 others. This marks the single-deadliest known attack under President Donald Trump's new campaign targeting the Houthis. (AP) Russian invasion of Ukraine Peace negotiations in the Russian invasion of Ukraine U.S. Secretary of State Marco Rubio announces that the Trump administration is ready to abandon diplomatic efforts and "move on" if it is not possible to end the war in "a matter of days". (CNN) Persecution of Ahmadis in Pakistan One man is killed in Karachi, Pakistan, after a mob of radical Islamists belonging to Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan attack the Ahmadiyya community after Friday prayer. (DW) Disasters and accidents The death toll of the fire and capsizing of the wooden boat HB Kongolo on the Congo River in Democratic Republic of the Congo three days ago rises to 148. Hundreds of others remain missing. (Reuters) At least three people are killed when a small plane crashes into the Platte River in Omaha, Nebraska, United States. (KLKN) Three people, including a lay minister, are killed and seventeen others are injured when a car driven by an Indian national driving under the influence hits a tricycle and crashes into a procession in Bacolod, Philippines. (Philippine Daily Inquirer) The death toll of the capsized Hong Hai 16 sand barge three days ago off Occidental Mindoro, Philippines, rises to six. Five others are still missing. (GMA) April 17, 2025 (2025-04-17) (Thursday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks Gaza war Rafah offensive The Israel Defense Forces begins the expansion of the recently-established Morag Corridor buffer zone to include the southern Gaza city of Rafah, intending to connect it with the Philadelphi Corridor. Witnesses report the Israeli demolition of structures in Rafah. (Al Jazeera) (RBC Ukraine) At least 37 people, including children, are killed in a series of Israeli strikes against displaced Palestinians in the Gaza Strip, according to the Palestinian Civil Defence agency. (BBC News) Red Sea crisis March–April 2025 United States attacks in Yemen The United States Navy launches a wave of missile strikes across Houthi-controlled Yemen, killing at least one person in Sanaa. (AP) Somali Civil War 2025 Shabelle offensive, American military intervention in Somalia U.S. airstrikes kill twelve al-Shabaab insurgents in central Somalia, while a separate airstrike destroys an unflagged vessel suspected of carrying weapons for the militant group off the Somali coast. (Reuters) (Middle East Monitor) Disasters and accidents Kočani nightclub fire The death toll from the fire at a nightclub in Kočani, North Macedonia, in March increases to 62 as a burn victim dies in the hospital. (Sloboden Pečat) Monte Faito cable car crash Four people are killed and one is injured after the collapse of an aerial tramway on the Monte Faito in Campania, Italy. (Il Messaggero) The death toll of the capsized Hong Hai 16 two days ago off Occidental Mindoro, Philippines, rises to four. Seven others are still missing. (Philippine News Agency) A middle school student is killed and several others are injured when a school bus returning from a field trip blows a tire, strikes a guard rail, and overturns on Interstate 77 in Chester County, South Carolina, United States. Two other buses travelling back from the field trip maneuvered to avoid crashing into it. Between the three buses, at least 35 students and four adults were injured. (ABC News) Law and crime Tropic Air Flight 711 A hijacker is killed and three others are injured when a U.S. citizen hijacks a Tropic Air Cessna 208 Caravan and attacks passengers with a knife before being fatally shot by a passenger with a firearm at Philip S. W. Goldson International Airport in Belize City, Belize. (ABC News) (Airways) 2025 Florida State University shooting At least two people are killed and six others are hospitalized in a mass shooting at Florida State University in Tallahassee, Florida, United States. The suspect is arrested by local police. (AP) (The New York Times) (NBC News) Illegal drug trade in Turkey Turkish police detain 525 suspected drug dealers in Ankara, in what is the biggest narcotics operation in the country's history, involving thousands of officers, sniffer dogs, drones, and helicopters, according to the interior ministry. (AP) (Türkiye Today) The government of Myanmar pardons and releases 4,893 prisoners, including thirteen foreigners who will be deported from the country, and 22 political prisoners, ahead of the country's New Year. (DW) (Radio Free Asia) Two people are severely injured in a stabbing attack at an Aldi supermarket in Rochlitz, Saxony, Germany. (DW) Politics and elections Deportation of Kilmar Abrego Garcia U.S. Senator Chris Van Hollen meets with Kilmar Abrego Garcia in El Salvador to push for his release after being denied a meeting hours earlier by the Salvadoran government. (Politico) April 16, 2025 (2025-04-16) (Wednesday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks Russian invasion of Ukraine Kherson strikes Russian artillery and glide bombs target Kherson, Ukraine, killing one person and injuring nine others. A sports facility, a supermarket, and residential buildings were among those hit. (AP) Dnipro strikes A large-scale drone attack on Dnipro, Dnipropetrovsk Oblast, kills two people and injures 16 others. (Reuters) Somali Civil War 2025 Shabelle offensive Al-Shabaab militants capture the Adan Yabal District in Middle Shabelle, Somalia, as the group continues to advance towards the capital Mogadishu. (Reuters) Business and economy Tariffs in the second Trump administration California Governor Gavin Newsom and California Attorney General Rob Bonta file a lawsuit against U.S. President Donald Trump and his administration over the tariffs, making California the first U.S. state to do so. The lawsuit also targets the International Economic Emergency Powers Act, the law used by Trump to impose tariffs against Canada, China, and Mexico. (Politico) Disasters and accidents Authorities recover the remains of a Filipino crew member from the sand barge Hong Hai 16 that capsized off Occidental Mindoro, Philippines, yesterday, bringing the total death toll to two. Nine others are reportedly still missing. (GMA News) The HB Kongolo traveling from Matankumu to Bolomba, carrying around 400 people, catches fire and capsizes on the Congo River near Mbandaka, Democratic Republic of the Congo, killing at least 50 people and leaving hundreds more missing. (AP) Three people are killed and two others are injured when two boats collide on Lewis Smith Lake in Cullman County, Alabama, United States, during a Major League Fishing tournament. (ABC News) Health and environment The United Kingdom suspends the import of cheese and meat products from the European Union to prevent the spread of foot-and-mouth disease. (BBC News) International relations Brazil–Peru relations, Aftermath of the Operation Car Wash Following her sentencing to 15 years in prison, former First Lady of Peru Nadine Heredia and her son Samin flee to Brazil's capital Brasília after the country grants their right of asylum. (AP) Law and crime Democratic backsliding in Slovakia, 2025 Slovak protests The Slovak government passes a law requiring non-governmental organizations to disclose their funding sources and the names of major donors. Opposition groups criticize the law as it could restrict civil society institutions. (DW) (Politico) Israeli–Lebanese conflict The Lebanese military detains a group of people, including several Palestinians, for firing rockets towards Israel in two separate attacks. Hezbollah denies their involvement in the rocket attacks. (AP) Transgender rights in the United Kingdom, For Women Scotland Ltd v The Scottish Ministers The Supreme Court of the United Kingdom rules that legal gender is based upon biological sex for the purposes of the Equality Act 2010. (BBC News) A German palliative care doctor is charged for allegedly killing fifteen patients between 2021 and 2024 in Berlin. He is being investigated in an additional 75 suspected cases and also accused of trying to cover up the evidence by starting fires in their homes. (AP) (Tagesschau) Politics and elections Sudanese civil war The leader of the Sudanese Rapid Support Forces, Mohamed Hamdan Dagalo, announces the establishment of the Government of Peace and Unity, a rival government to the country's armed forces. (BBC News) Science and technology A research team at the University of Cambridge announces that the James Webb Space Telescope has detected dimethyl sulfide, a chemical thought to be produced in nature only by living organisms, on exoplanet K2-18b, a sub-Neptune planet around 124 light-years (38 pc) away from Earth. (BBC News) A colossal squid is filmed in the Southern Atlantic Ocean for the first time since the species was discovered in 1925. The 30 cm (12 in)-long juvenile was filmed by a team of scientists led by the University of Essex near the South Sandwich Islands at a depth of 600 m (2,000 ft). (BBC News) Sports Women's World Chess Championship 2025 Chinese grandmaster Ju Wenjun wins her fifth consecutive Women's World Chess Championship title after defeating fellow Chinese grandmaster Tan Zhongyi with a score of 6.5–2.5. Ju becomes the first Chinese player to win the championship five times. (CNN) April 15, 2025 (2025-04-15) (Tuesday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks Russian invasion of Ukraine 2025 Sumy airstrike Ukrainian military leader Volodymyr Artyukh is fired from his position as Sumy Oblast Governor following condemnation for organizing a military ceremony in the densely populated Sumy city center, which was later targeted by a Russian airstrike. (The Kyiv Independent) Sudanese civil war, Foreign aid to Sudan Humanitarian impact of the Sudanese civil war The European Union and its member states pledge €522 million (US$590 million) and the United Kingdom pledges £120 million (US$141 million) in humanitarian aid to Sudan to deliver food and supplies to over 650,000 internally displaced Sudanese people affected by the fighting between the Rapid Support Forces and the Sudanese Armed Forces. The two groups also call for an immediate ceasefire to end the war. (DW) (AP) Insurgency in Balochistan At least three Balochistan Police officers are killed and 16 others are injured when a roadside bomb hits a bus carrying police personnel in Mastung District, Balochistan, Pakistan. (DW) Business and economy Tariffs in the second Trump administration China–United States trade war China orders its airlines to stop taking deliveries of jets from American aviation company Boeing and to suspend purchases of aircraft-related equipment and parts from U.S. companies. (NDTV) Disasters and accidents At least 3,747 people are hospitalized with breathing difficulties and airports are closed after a dust storm in Iraq. (France 24) A Chinese crew member is killed when Chinese sand barge vessel M/V Hong Hai 16 capsizes off Rizal, Occidental Mindoro, Philippines. A search and rescue operation is launched by the Philippine Coast Guard for missing crew members, which includes seven Filipinos and three Chinese. (The Philippine Star) Health and environment The European Commission approves the use of Lecanemab, a monoclonal antibody medication that targets amyloid beta peptides, to treat the early stages of Alzheimer's disease via intravenous therapy. This is the first drug to be approved to treat the disease in Europe, and was approved by the Food and Drug Administration in the United States in 2023. (DW) International relations Algeria–France relations France expels twelve Algerian diplomatic officials from the country after Algeria expelled twelve French officials yesterday over the arrest of an Algerian consular official in a kidnapping case. France also recalls its ambassador from Algiers. (AP) (Bloomberg) Israel–Maldives relations, Visa policy of the Maldives The Parliament of the Maldives votes in favor of an amendment to the Immigration Act, banning entry into the Maldives for those traveling on Israeli passports. (The Edition) Law and crime Media freedom in Russia Four Russian journalists linked to the late Russian opposition leader Alexei Navalny are convicted of extremism and sentenced to five years and six months imprisonment in a penal colony. (CNN) (AP) Piracy in the 21st century According to a report by the International Maritime Bureau, piracy has risen by almost 35% in 2025 with 45 cases in the first quarter compared to the same period in 2024, particularly in the Singapore Strait between Singapore and Indonesia. (DW) (Seatrade Maritime News) Aftermath of the Operation Car Wash A court in Lima, Peru, sentences former president Ollanta Humala and his wife Nadine Heredia to 15 years in prison for laundering funds from Brazilian company Odebrecht to finance his 2006 and 2011 presidential campaigns. (AP) (BBC News) At least four students are injured in a school mass shooting at Wilmer-Hutchins High School in Dallas, Texas, United States. (BNO News) Four people are injured in a vehicle-ramming attack after a person drives a sedan onto a pedestrian walkway on the Toronto Metropolitan University campus near Yonge Street and Gerrard Street in Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (CBC News) Science and technology 4chan is hacked and goes offline, with the website's source code and the usernames, IP addresses, and email addresses of its staff leaked by imageboard Soyjak.party. (Dailydot) (Cybernews) (MSN) Arts and Culture Events and ceremonies are held around the world marking the 113th anniversary of the sinking of the RMS Titanic. More April 2025 events... Time: 17:40 UTC|Day: 21 April ◀April 2025▶ S M T W T F S 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 More April 2025 events... Wikimedia portal About this page Report a dispute • News about Wikipedia Ongoing events Disasters Avian flu outbreak United States opioid epidemic Economics Canadian economic crisis Chinese property sector crisis German economic crisis United Kingdom cost-of-living crisis United States tariff policy United States–China trade war Protests and strikes French far-right protests Georgian protests and political crisis Gaza war protests Indonesian anti-government protests Serbian anti-corruption protests Turkish anti-government protests edit section Elections and referendums Recent April 12: Gabon, President 13: Ecuador, President (2nd) Upcoming 25: Marshall Islands, Constitutional referendum 28: Canada, House of Commons 28: Trinidad and Tobago, House of Representatives 30: Cayman Islands, Parliament, Referendum May 03: Australia, Senate, House of Representatives 03: Singapore, Parliament 04: Romania, President (1st) edit section Trials Recently concluded South Korea:0Yoon Suk Yeol Ongoing Kosovo:0Specialist Chambers ICC:0Ali Kushayb • Mahamat Said Abdel Kani edit section Sports Association football 2024–25 UEFA Champions League 2024–25 UEFA Europa League 2024–25 UEFA Conference League 2024–25 UEFA Women's Champions League 2024–25 Premier League 2024–25 Serie A 2024–25 La Liga 2024–25 Bundesliga 2024–25 Ligue 1 2025 Major League Soccer season 2025 National Women's Soccer League season Australian rules football 2025 AFL season Baseball 2025 MLB season Basketball 2025 NBA playoffs 2024–25 EuroLeague International cricket 2023–25 ICC World Test Championship 2025 IPL season Golf 2025 PGA Tour 2025 LIV Golf League 2025 LPGA Tour Ice hockey 2025 Stanley Cup playoffs 2024–25 PWHL season Motorsport 2025 Formula One World Championship 2025 MotoGP World Championship 2025 NASCAR Cup Series 2025 IndyCar Series Rugby league 2025 NRL season 2025 Super League season Rugby union 2024–25 SVNS 2024–25 European Rugby Champions Cup 2024–25 Premiership Rugby 2024–25 United Rugby Championship 2025 Super Rugby Pacific season Tennis 2025 ATP Tour 2025 WTA Tour More details – current sports events edit section Recent deaths April 21: Pope Francis 18: Clodagh Rodgers 17: Joe Thompson 16: Nora Aunor 15: Wink Martindale 14: Elaine Wynn 14: Abdullah Ahmad Badawi 13: Richard Armitage 13: Mario Vargas Llosa 13: Jean Marsh 12: Pilita Corrales 11: Mike Berry 11: Max Romeo 10: Leo Beenhakker 10: Ted Kotcheff 09: Ray Shero 09: Kim Shin-jo 08: Octavio Dotel 08: Nicky Katt 07: William Finn 07: Greg Millen 06: Clem Burke 06: Jay North 04: Manoj Kumar 03: Theodore McCarrick 03: Mick O'Dwyer 02: Khamtai Siphandone 01: Val Kilmer 01: Michael Hurley 01: Johnny Tillotson March 31: Sian Barbara Allen 31: Betty Webb 29: Richard Chamberlain 28: Richard Norton 27: Christina McKelvie 25: Terry Manning 24: Dick Carlson 23: Max Frankel 23: Mia Love 22: Jessica Aber 21: Kitty Dukakis 21: George Foreman edit section Ongoing conflicts Global War against the Islamic State Africa Cameroon Anglophone Crisis Central African Republic Civil war Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda Kivu conflict Nigeria Boko Haram insurgency Sahel insurgency Mali War Burkina Faso Niger Somalia Civil war Sudan Civil war Americas Haiti Gang war Mexico Mexican drug war Asia−Pacific Afghanistan Islamic State–Taliban conflict India Naxalite–Maoist insurgency Myanmar Civil war Pakistan Insurgency in Balochistan Insurgency in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Philippines NPA rebellion Europe Russia and Ukraine Russian invasion of Ukraine Middle East Israel Gaza war Israeli invasion of Lebanon Syria Israeli invasion of Syria Turkey PKK insurgency Yemen Red Sea crisis See also – List of ongoing proxy wars edit section 2025 events and developments by topic Arts Animation (Anime) Architecture Comics Film (Horror, Science fiction) Literature (Poetry) Music (Classical, Country, Hip hop, Jazz, Latin, Metal, Rock, UK, US, Korea) Radio Television (Australia, Canada, Ireland, UK, Scotland, US) Video games Politics and government Elections International leaders Sovereign states Sovereign state leaders Territorial governors Science and technology Archaeology Biotechnology Computing Palaeontology Quantum computing and communication Senescence research Space/Astronomy Spaceflight Sustainable energy research Environment and environmental sciences Climate change Weather (Heat waves Tornadoes Wildfires) Transportation Aviation Rail transport Transportation technology By place Afghanistan Albania Algeria Andorra Angola Antarctica Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bangladesh The Bahamas Bahrain Barbados Belarus Belgium Belize Benin Bhutan Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Botswana Brazil Brunei Bulgaria Burkina Faso Burundi Cambodia Cameroon Canada Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Chile China Colombia Costa Rica Comoros Congo DR Congo Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Djibouti Dominica Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Eritrea Estonia Ethiopia Eswatini Equatorial Guinea Fiji Finland France Gabon The Gambia Georgia Germany Ghana Greece Grenada Guatemala Guinea Guinea-Bissau Guyana Haiti Honduras Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Iraq Ireland Israel Italy Ivory Coast Jamaica Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kiribati Kosovo Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Latvia Lebanon Lesotho Liberia Liechtenstein Libya Lithuania Luxembourg Macau Madagascar Marshall Islands Malawi Malaysia Maldives Mali Malta Mauritania Mauritius Mexico Micronesia Moldova Monaco Mongolia Montenegro Morocco Mozambique Myanmar Nauru Namibia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Niger Nigeria North Korea North Macedonia Norway Oman Pakistan Palau Palestine Panama Papua New Guinea Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Qatar Romania Russia Rwanda Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Samoa San Marino São Tomé and Príncipe Saudi Arabia Senegal Serbia Seychelles Sierra Leone Singapore Slovakia Slovenia Somalia South Africa Solomon Islands South Korea South Sudan Spain Sri Lanka Sudan Suriname Sweden Switzerland Syria Taiwan Tajikistan Tanzania Thailand Timor-Leste Togo Tonga Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia Turkey Turkmenistan Tuvalu Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates United Kingdom United States Uruguay Uzbekistan Vanuatu Vatican City Venezuela Vietnam Yemen Zambia Zimbabwe Establishments and disestablishments categories Establishments Disestablishments Works and introductions categories Works Introductions Works entering the public domain 2025 at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Taxa from Wikispecies Discussions from Meta-Wiki ...more edit section v t e Current events by month 2025 January February March April 2024 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2023 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2022 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2021 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2020 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2019 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2018 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2017 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2016 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2015 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2014 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2013 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2012 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2011 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2010 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2009 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2008 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2007 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2006 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2005 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2004 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2003 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2002 January February March April May June July August September October November December Portal:Current events Calendars Discover Wikipedia using portals List of all portals The arts portal Biography portal Current events portal Geography portal History portal Mathematics portal Science portal Society portal Technology portal Random portal WikiProject Portals Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Current_events&oldid=1234748158" Categories: All portals 2025 by day Current events portal 2025 Current events WikiProject Current events History portals Hidden categories: Wikipedia pages protected against vandalism Portals with triaged subpages from October 2020 All portals with triaged subpages Portals with no named maintainer This page was last edited on 15 July 2024, at 23:17 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Portal:Current events 118 languages Add topic